[THEME MUSIC] >>
REGINA MEREDITH:
According Alan Butler
and Janet Walter,
America was founded on
a cult of goddesses.
They say a handful
of Venus families
were at the core of the layout
of the architecture and culture
of the developing nation.
I'm sure this is all
news to many of you,
so stay tuned and welcome, Alan.
Alan, I'm so glad you could come
in and be here with us today.
>> ALAN BUTLER: It's a
great pleasure to be here.
>> REGINA: Let's talk about--
most people think of the US
as having been found
by men, for men.
How did you come about the
feminine slant on the founding
of the new world?
>> BUTLER: Well, it actually
goes back quite a long time.
My original research writing
was into the ancient history
of Europe, going right
back to Stone Age times
and to the people
who built structures
like Stonehenge, for example.
And they were people
whose religion
was based upon a kind
of a tripartite deity.
They believed in
the god who they saw
as being the Sun or the sky.
They believed in the Earth
as being the great mother.
And they were closer to her
than to any other deity.
And they also believed
in a third deity,
who was the son of the god-- who
was perpetually born and died
because he represented the
grain, the wheat and the barley
and so forth.
So it's a long story.
And we only really know
about their religion
because of contemporary cultures
like the Minoans in Crete
who were at the
same time and who
seem to have had exactly
the same religion.
Now, it's my belief--
and in fact, there's
plenty of proof
to show that it is
so-- that those
original beliefs that
went alongside the fantastic
mathematical and astronomical
knowledge these people had were
maintained and perpetuated.
They never died.
They were hidden within society,
in certain groups of people.
And they were guarded
very carefully,
because when they came
up against the advent
of new religions like
Christianity and Judaism
and Islam, then the
people concerned
were likely to be persecuted if
they were seen to be venerating
a female deity.
And so therefore, this
was hidden for generation
upon generation.
And we found-- this was with
a previous associate of mine
called Chris Knight-- we
found that the astrology
and astronomy, which
they were using,
had been perpetuated
within society.
And it kept cropping
up time and again,
as, indeed, did the religion.
But you had to
know where to look.
And one of the things
which always betrayed it
was that these people had
created a very special kind
of measuring system which was
extremely accurate, but very
different than any
that we use today.
And it was based upon a
unit of measurement called
the megalithic yard,
which was rediscovered
by a Scottish professor
of engineering
when he measured a lot of
the megalithic monuments,
like Stonehenge, and Avebury,
and lots of the others.
>> REGINA: What would that unit
of measurement look like today
in feet or meters?
>> BUTLER: It would be 2.722
feet, so not so far off a yard,
but not quite as big as a yard.
Now, this particular
measurement seemed
to have disappeared completely
after the Bronze Age times.
But then quite suddenly
and quite mysteriously,
Chris and I found it.
And we found it in the South of
England in a city called Bath.
Now, Bath had been largely
rebuilt in the 18th century.
And we knew that the
guy who'd done it,
a guy called John Wood, was
both a Freemason and a member
of the ancient order of Druids.
He left his credentials
all over the city of Bath,
in terms of the stone
measurement that he used
and friezes that were carved
with strong Masonic symbols.
And right in the
center of his work
is a place called King's Circus.
Now, there was a guy on the
television who was actually
doing an expose of Bath.
And he happened to mention the
dimensions of King's Circus,
which is a circular, grassy area
with beautiful Georgian houses
around it.
And when he mentioned
this, I nearly
fell off the sofa at
home, because I recognized
the dimensions
immediately as being
exactly the same as the
dimensions of Stonehenge.
And I knew that Stonehenge
was measurable in terms
of this megalithic yard.
So then we went on to
find the megalithic yard
all over the city of Bath.
>> REGINA: Always
in circular form?
>> BUTLER: Not necessarily, no.
Sometimes it was straight lines.
There is a great,
big key there, which
is an intersection
of several roads.
And that is measurable in
terms of the megalithic yard.
But we couldn't find
anywhere else in Britain,
because there was nowhere
else which at the time
had been completely
knocked down and renovated.
So they couldn't
start from scratch.
So we decided to cast around.
And the first city that
came into our mind, which
would be a really
good candidate,
would be Washington,
DC, because it
was built exactly the same time
as parts of Bath were rebuilt.
And we were astounded.
There is not a section of
Central Washington, DC,
that is not measurable in
units of the megalithic yard,
and, specifically, in 366
megalithic yards, which
is the optimum measurement which
our ancient ancestors used.
366 was a really
important number
to them for all
sorts of reasons.
And to find it in Washington,
DC, was an absolute revelation.
Well, it just so happened
that I was called to America
soon after this to do some
work with another documentary
program.
And we were in Washington, DC.
And I had some free time.
And I wandered around the city.
And I was absolutely astounded
at the number of goddess
statues that adorned the city.
Now on the one hand, that
might be just due to the fact
that neoclassicism was
very popular at the time.
And goddesses appear a lot
on neoclassical statues.
But it seemed to be
out of all proportion.
And so that, together
with the megalithic yard,
caused us to look much more
carefully at Washington, DC,
than we might
otherwise have done.
It already had supposed
astronomical credentials.
And when I got
together with Janet,
and we went back to Washington,
DC, and spent a lot of time
with measuring rods and
looking and photographing,
then we began to realize that
there was something extremely
special about this city.
It is, on the one hand,
exactly what it appears to be.
It is the capital, of course,
of the United States of America,
where the laws
are made and where
your version of the
parliament sits.
And it does all of those
things administratively.
But beneath the surface, and not
very far beneath the surface,
is a city that was
designed primarily
with a goddess in mind.
>> REGINA: So the geometrical
layout is feminine in nature,
and that would mean that that
energetic imprint would show
itself somewhere.
But you say much
of this information
was flowing out from the
Eleusinian Mysteries dedicated
to Demeter, and Ceres, and Isis.
And Isis, of course,
comes back into play
when we're talking about
Washington, DC, a little bit.
Tell us about the
Eleusinian Mysteries.
>> BUTLER: Well, the
Eleusinian Mysteries,
which were celebrated
in Eleusis--
which is not far from
Athens in Greece--
was probably the longest-running
religious ceremony,
yearly ceremony, that
the world has ever known.
It lasted for over 1,000
years and probably much longer
than that.
What used to happen
is that devotees
from all over the known world
used to gather in Athens,
and they would spend a
couple of days in Athens.
And then they would
walk in ceremony
to this place, Eleusis, where
there was a huge temple which
was dedicated to Demeter,
who was the Greek version
of the Earth goddess.
She's often called the Goddess
of A Thousand Names justifiably
because she has so
many personifications.
But Demeter was
their version of it.
Now at the Demeter celebrations,
men and women, free people
and slaves, all took
part in a mystery rite.
It's called a mystery rite
because nobody ever spoke
about it, on pain of death.
We know that it took
all night for them
to go through this
elaborate ceremony
inside this huge
temple, but we don't
know exactly what happened.
Though it seems almost
certainly to be the case
that they ritually died and were
reborn during this ceremony,
into the rights and into
the privileges of Demeter.
And undoubtedly, it
involved the same process
I was talking about
a few minutes ago,
the communion of the sky
and the Earth-- the god
and the goddess-- the
birth of the young god who
is represented by
the cereal grain,
and then the death
of the young god
when the cereal
grain was cut down.
And this was a yearly ceremony.
And of course, it took
place in September.
And that was important
because that was the time when
the grain was being harvested.
So it really celebrated
death and rebirth.
And it was crucially
important because it
was part of a religious
practice which
seemed to have been all across
Europe, and well into Asia.
Wherever we find remnants
of ancient religion,
we find this sort of thing.
And even by the time
it was being celebrated
as the Mysteries of
Demeter in Athens,
it was already extremely
old and had already existed
for thousands of years.
Now, we find statues of Demeter,
and of her Roman counterpart
who is called Ceres,
more in Washington, DC,
than any other named
goddess statue.
And because of the orientation
of the buildings, things
that we'll talk about
in a little while, then
we know that there
is a connection.
But we know for another
important reason
that there's a connection.
That is because when it came
to the founding fathers passing
a new constitution--
because of course,
a free United States
couldn't really
be a nation until it
had a constitution.
When they did that, they
did it in Pennsylvania
in the 18th century.
They met for months and months.
They met for so long that
everybody was saying,
why can't we go home?
We seem to have-- >> REGINA:
Took a very long time.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> BUTLER: But, no.
They kept the land.
They kept the land
until September.
And Constitution
Day just happens
to be exactly the
same day in the year
when the Eleusinian
Mysteries used to take place.
And that is recorded,
physically, in Washington DC,
again, something we'll
go on to talk about.
>> REGINA: Oh.
OK.
Very interesting.
And from the little bit I
know about the mysteries,
those mysteries, when
they were looking at life
beyond this life, it was a
very idealized, very plentiful,
very ordered toward
the Earth, the beauty,
and the bounty of the Earth, and
the feminine presence on Earth.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
I think as far as we know,
within the ceremonies
themselves, the
aspirants-- the people who
took part-- were first of
all taken to a place which
we would call Hell.
It was awful.
And to get a great
contrast, then as you say,
they were taken to what was
known as the Elysian Fields,
where everything was beautiful.
>> REGINA: Perfect.
Yes.
>> BUTLER: And I think they were
being taught that not only was
that what could be
expected after death,
but also they were being taught
that that was the way the world
should be.
So it was idealism
for the present life
as well as any future life.
>> REGINA: Well, I happen
to agree with that vision.
Why can't it be that lovely
and plentiful, right?
And peaceful.
OK.
So let's go into
the Venus Family,
as you coined that term.
Let's talk-- give
a little background
as to why you call these
particular families the Venus
Families, and
individuals as well.
And how?
What the evidence for that was.
>> BUTLER: We had to
give these people a name.
We knew that they existed
in the background.
Right from Stone Age times,
right through early history--
the Dark Ages, the
Medieval Period--
we have lots of evidence.
Their appearance
within society I
coined as being
like a golden thread
through the tapestry of time.
They just appeared in different
guises all over the place.
And we knew it was
them because of the way
they measured things, because
of their reverence for the sky,
because they turned existing
religions into vehicles
that they could use.
And for all sorts of reasons,
we knew they were there.
And the one thing
that they all betrayed
was a particular reverence
for the planet Venus.
Now, it isn't just the Earth
that represents the goddess.
Venus does as well.
>> REGINA: Venus, yes.
>> BUTLER: She still
has a female name.
And so Venus is
very, very important
for all sorts of reasons,
especially mathematical ones.
And we have to say that these
ancient beliefs not only
encompassed what we
would call religion,
but also what we
would call science.
In other words, there
was no differentiation
between the knowledge of the
sky in terms of its movements,
mathematically, and in terms of
its meanings, astrologically.
Everything was bunched together.
And Venus has a very special
relationship with the Earth
mathematically.
For every eight
Earth years, Venus
goes through five complete
cycles, as seen from the Earth.
And this 8 to 5
relationship throws up
all sorts of
mathematical certainties
which the ancient people seem
to have known instinctively.
It's enabled them to
predict other happenings,
because it ties in with
other cycles as well.
So it even has an association
with the cycles of the moon.
Also, Venus is, indisputably,
probably the most beautiful
object in the sky, apart from,
arguably, the Sun and the Moon.
And it changes from
being a morning
star to being an evening star.
That in itself was
a kind of clock.
Well, we find out that
are groups of people--
always venerated Venus.
And it was such
a important thing
that connected them that we
thought that was a good name
to give to them.
We have no idea what these
people call themselves.
>> REGINA: Interesting, because
I've done a couple of very
esoteric interviews.
OK?
And one of them had
to do with the life
and times of George Adamski.
And Adamski was a gentleman
who challenged others
to please listen to
his story, tear it
apart, make him wrong on it.
He was really quite an
intelligent, beautiful
individual.
But in his day, he was saying he
had met with beings from Venus,
right?
And that he had been taken
into their environment
and shown what they
know and so forth.
And essentially, it shows itself
like the Eleusinian fields--
just a more perfected, peaceful,
abundant, beautiful version
of Earth life.
Now, that same story and
those same characters
got passed through,
through Paula Harris'
work and the valiant Thor story,
which is fascinating in itself.
And again, they
claim to be Venusians
in that they were trying to
share some of the healing
principles from Venus
with the people here.
And one of the things that was
in Adamski's work in particular
was a greater understanding of
anti-gravity but also geometry,
the way they understood it.
And I found that part of
the work really fascinating,
because it was far beyond
what we understand right now.
I'm just tossing that in because
our viewers may have already
seen those interviews or may
want to be guided there--
for a notion of
what, in these times,
some of the esoteric
thinking has
to say about the occupants
of Venus, whatever
dimension that may be in.
>> BUTLER: It's very
strange that there are those
connections.
We try always, wherever
possible with our work,
to stick to what is
scientifically provable.
>> REGINA: That's your arena.
And I'm tossing
the other part in.
>> BUTLER: No.
But that's very
valid, because when
you find the esoteric meets the
practical-- >> REGINA: Well,
that's what I like.
>> BUTLER: --then you're
probably on to something.
>> REGINA: I think so.
And you say, these families had
a great interest in astronomy.
>> BUTLER: Mhm.
Definitely.
>> REGINA: So again-- >>
BUTLER: And astrology.
>> REGINA: And astrology.
So let's talk about
that a little bit.
>> BUTLER: I think the
fundamental interest
in astronomy originated
right back at the start,
probably as long ago as 3,000
BC-- and for several reasons.
There were practical reasons.
We call these people
megalithic people.
Megalithic means big stone.
They moved big stones
around the landscape.
And the one thing
that they needed to do
was to travel and to trade.
But Great Britain is not a very
good island for getting about.
And it certainly
wasn't in those days,
because it would have been
very marshy in the lowlands
and inhospitable in the uplands.
The only real option they had
for getting about was by water.
So they traveled a
lot around the coast,
and they traveled a
lot on the rivers.
But particularly, they used
a lot of coastal travel.
And one of the epicenters
of megalithic culture
was in Scotland, which is even
more inhospitable, weather
wise, than England is.
So the one thing that they
needed more than anything else
was to understand the tides.
And the tides are affected
greatly-- in fact,
almost exclusively--
by the Moon.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> BUTLER: So if you know what
the Moon's phases are going
to be and what the Moon is
going to be doing next--
how high it is in the
sky this month, how low--
then you have a very good idea
of how high the tides are going
to be.
And that together with your
required, local knowledge
allows you to travel
safely at a time
when the craft that
they were using
were not particularly advanced.
So it meant they could get
about-- so practical knowledge.
>> REGINA: Every
farmer's almanac--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> BUTLER: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
They similarly needed to
know about the movements
and position of the Sun
throughout the Earth,
because they were early farmers.
They needed to know when to
plant and when to harvest.
And all of these things were
very much tied up with the sky.
If they were doing
longer-distance travel,
they would need to understand
the other planets and the stars
as well, because that would
give them a good idea as to what
latitude they were at, for
example, when they were out
of sight of land.
So all of these
things came together
to make it really
important for them.
But at the same
time, they clearly
equated the sky with the Earth.
They seem to have
thought that the sky was
the Earth turned inside out.
So everything that
happened on the Earth
had a celestial counterpart.
We're going to come eventually
to talk about Orion's Belt.
And that's part of one of
the constellations which
were really important to them.
They thought that the Earth
could be connected literally
with the stars.
And so everything that they
did had, on the one hand,
a very practical aspect to
it, and also a very esoteric
and religious aspect as well.
>> REGINA: And when we get into
some of the cast of characters,
we'll understand this
a little bit better.
But you say that, oftentimes,
these Venus families
work through the Freemasonry.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
>> REGINA: Let's bring
that into the story.
>> BUTLER: OK.
We need to just talk about
those people we refer to
as the Venus families.
They are the central
core of all of this.
And organizations like
Freemasons, like Rosicrucians,
like the Grange organization
in America, they are,
if you like, the foot soldiers
of the Venus families.
So the Venus families run
the show behind the scenes,
but they express
themselves in society
through other organizations.
And the Freemasons
is one of them.
The origin of the Freemasons is
really absolutely fascinating.
Nobody knows, in a
true historical sense,
where Freemasonry came from.
But you can trace the lineage,
which is utterly fascinating.
They go back to medieval
times-- >> REGINA: Yes.
>> BUTLER: --in particular
to the building of the great
Gothic cathedrals and
to a group of people--
which was a kind of Guild
of Stonemasons in France--
called the Children of Solomon.
>> REGINA: Wouldn't those
have been also passed on from
the Knight Templar lineage?
>> BUTLER: Yes.
The Knights Templar-- >>
REGINA: And the Cistercian
monks and so forth.
>> BUTLER: This organization,
the Children of Solomon,
was so closely associated with
the Knights Templar that it
probably was an offshoot
of the same order.
But when the Knights Templar
was destroyed in 1307,
the Children of Solomon
Guild went underground.
>> REGINA: Right.
And a lot of the Templar's
that weren't signed,
went underground.
>> BUTLER: That's right.
And it never ceased to exist.
In the meantime, a group of
these Children of Solomon,
had gone to a place
on the West Coast
of Scotland called
Kilwinning, where
a new abbey was being built.
And they were
peripatetic, these people.
They traveled all over
Europe, taking their skills
where they were needed.
But instead of
leaving Kilwinning
after the abbey was completed,
they stayed in the town.
And they kept on existing as
a brotherhood, in Kilwinning.
Even right through the
Reformation of the church
and into Protestantism,
they were still there.
And coinciding with what they
call the great Enlightenment,
when superstition was starting
to turn into science and people
were meeting in the
coffee houses of Edinburgh
and so forth, then
the organization
which had been formed in
Kilwinning came to Edinburgh.
And that seems to be
where Freemasonry-- >>
REGINA: Scottish Freemasonry.
>> BUTLER: Mhm.
>> REGINA: This vision
they had of the new world,
with a Masonic
participation in this--
you have very high
levels of knowledge.
And then you have the
practical, everyday person
that joins for political
or social reasons.
And you can use it for good.
You can use it for
something else.
>> BUTLER: And do you know
the amazing thing, Regina,
about Freemasonry is every
piece of information,
the most esoteric of
information, is accessible,
or it's there, for
anyone who wants to look.
But it's a bit like--
let me give you
an example here in London,
where we are at the moment.
We have a nursery rhyme
that children learn
called "Oranges and Lemons."
And it has a tune that goes
with it, and it starts out,
Oranges and Lemons says
the bells of St. Clemens.
I owe you five farthings said
the bells of St. Martin's.
And it goes on like that.
Now, that little
nursery rhyme actually
recalls the sounds
of the peals of bells
in the churches in London.
But it gave us that information
about the churches before 1666,
when there was a great fire
here in London which destroyed
every one of the churches.
So subsequently, the bells
never sounded like that again,
because new peals of bells
were put in the new churches.
So anyone who learns that
nursery rhyme and sings it
is party to information which
is several hundred years old,
but they don't
know that they are.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> BUTLER: And that's the
same with Freemasonry.
All the secrets are
there, but you must
have the key to unlock them.
And little by little,
Freemasons are
given more and more of the
key that allows them to unlock
what's really going on.
>> REGINA: And, yes.
OK.
Now, let's cross the Freemasons
over with the Grange.
Introduce the Grange.
>> BUTLER: The Grange is
an amazing organization.
Not long after the
American Civil War,
the South in particular was in
a terrible state, obviously.
A lot of the farmers,
small farmers,
down there had either been
killed or injured in the war.
And trade had
virtually disappeared.
And the people in Washington
were doing their very best
to try and rebuild the
infrastructure of the South.
And they persuaded a man
called Oliver Kelly to go down
into the South and
to talk to people
and see what could be done.
Now, Oliver Kelly
was a Freemason.
So he got his thinking
cap on, and he thought,
Southerners won't
talk to Northerners.
You can understand
just after a Civil War
why that would be the case.
So he went and
talked to Freemasons.
And they would talk to him,
because they were Freemasons.
And gradually, with a
committee of other people--
not just men-- he managed to
build a new organization which
was like a trade guild in a way
for farmers, for small farmers.
It gave them a political voice.
It taught them how
to do certain things.
It introduced them
to new techniques.
And it fought against the
monopolies of the railways
and so forth.
And he called it Grange.
>> REGINA:
Egalitarian in nature.
>> BUTLER: Absolutely
egalitarian.
>> REGINA: Which you liken
to the more of the feminine
principle.
>> BUTLER: Absolutely.
But that is because
of where it came from.
Now, when I was in
Freemasonry, the feminine side
of Freemasonry has had to
be very carefully hidden
over the years, for
all sorts of reasons.
That wasn't the case
with the Grange,
which was also based
on, more or less,
the same Freemasonic model.
But right from the start,
it was absolutely essential
that women were involved.
It was essential from a
practical point of view,
but it was essential
from the point of view
of building the America,
which slowly but surely,
and gradually, the Venus
families wanted to build.
So the committee got
together, and they
decided that they were going
to have an organization which
was based on degrees, the
same as Freemasonry is.
In the case of the Grange, there
were going to be seven degrees.
Each one of these
degrees was ruled over
by an actress who
took the name of one
of the ancient goddesses.
So there was Flora and
Pomona and Demeter and Ceres.
And you gradually,
little by little,
worked your way up the ladder.
Almost all of the organization
was done by women,
because of course, women
are much better organizers.
But this was one of
the first organizations
in the free world that seemed
to recognize that fact.
>> REGINA: But it's still
populated by a lot of men.
>> BUTLER: Yes, men
were in it as well.
But there were
quite strict rules.
For example, nobody was allowed
to drink at the meetings.
Nobody was allowed to
swear at the meetings.
So although it was diverse, and
although it was joint families
especially-- and
young people were
encouraged to take part
as well-- underneath it
all was Freemasonry.
And the strange thing is that at
the time, although Freemasonry
was being given a terrible time
in places like Washington DC,
nobody seems to
have said anything
about that aspect of the Grange.
Now the Grange-- >> REGINA:
Because their function
was useful in society.
>> BUTLER: True.
True.
Yes.
It could be argued that
the function of Freemasonry
is much more useful
than people realize.
I must throw my hat in the
ring, I am not a Freemason.
But I do know that they do
a tremendous amount of good
and never talk about it.
>> REGINA: No.
That is true, based on
ancient, ancient principles.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
>> REGINA: But again, from their
inheritance from the Knight
Templar.
At the same time,
the Knight Templar
were able to recruit a lot of
renegades, rapists, pillagers.
There were a lot of
people that were really
brutal in the Knight
Templar campaigns.
The crusader in the time
of the Crusades as well.
But the real
inheritance at the top
was much purer, cleaner,
and more noble than that.
>> BUTLER: And they turned a
lot of the bad ones around.
>> REGINA: They did.
And they did do that,
because otherwise,
you said hungry people that
needed align with something.
So they get,
basically, a paycheck.
According them some food.
>> BUTLER: They took so much
violence off the streets
of Western Europe in
the feudal period.
>> REGINA: Ultimately.
Yes.
Absolutely.
So now-- when we're
looking at the development
of the new world, with these
new principles and such,
we can't avoid Francis Bacon
in the New Atlantis, right?
>> BUTLER: Mhm.
Francis Bacon may have been a
very early, proto-Freemason.
It's impossible to say,
because even if Freemasonry
had existed at that time, it
must have been underground.
Because of the political
and religious turmoil
that was going on in
Britain at that time,
nobody could have admitted
to Freemasonic membership.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> BUTLER: So he may
have been a Freemason.
But he certainly was
associated with these people
we call the Venus families.
Almost everything that he did
and everything that he said
betrays the fact that he
had revolutionary ideas.
He was absolutely committed
to this concept of the New
Jerusalem, which is what
everything we are talking about
is really about at
the end of the day.
And that's why he wrote the
book about the New Jerusalem.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And talk about what that vision
was so people understand it.
>> BUTLER: He could get away
with it to a certain extent
because it was, ostensibly,
the Jerusalem that's mentioned
in the Bible in the
Book of Revelation.
So on the one hand,
nobody could take umbrage
with what he was saying, because
he was fulfilling gospels.
And you could say
that his idealized New
Jerusalem was really
just a version
of the Book of Revelation.
But at the same time,
what he was talking about
was religious and
political freedom.
I can't say that Francis
Bacon was right on the leading
edge of feminine equality.
But that would have been very
surprising back in Tudor times.
But we know that he treated
the women in his own sphere
extremely well.
He knew that women had to
be educated and so forth.
So probably within the remit
of the society he lived in,
he was going in that direction.
But what he really
wanted more than
anything else was a new start,
a start where dogmatism was out
of the window.
>> REGINA: The chains
of the past, in general.
>> BUTLER: Exactly.
Now, this had been tried
all across Western Europe,
right back into medieval times.
And I think the Venus families,
and those people associated
with them, had by
the time of Bacon
given up all hope that
anywhere in Western Europe
could become this
place that they
wanted to be the New Jerusalem.
Bacon wrote about it.
He talked about a
fictitious island
and talked about the
people who lived--
and the kind of life that they
led, the freedom that they had.
It was fictitious.
But at the same time, much of
it sounds very much like even
he envisaged America would be.
>> REGINA: Right.
Almost like planting some
sort of seed-- vision.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
And he could get away with
it as well because it wasn't
published until after he died.
>> REGINA: And also,
as you say, as fiction.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
And it was fiction.
He had great beliefs in America.
He had a lot to do with the
development of Virginia.
He personally sponsored
all sorts of expeditions
to Virginia.
And there are some
people who believe
that he went there himself.
Whilst I wouldn't say that
I believe that absolutely,
because there is
no absolute proof,
I wouldn't be unduly
surprised if he had been.
But whether he did or
not, he had a great deal
to say about what
America should be,
and a lot of it in the book
about New Jerusalem-- which,
as I say, wasn't published
until after his death,
so nobody could take
him out and burn him.
>> REGINA: Well, let's talk
about some of these players
in America.
First we come to
George Washington,
a well-known-- >> BUTLER: Yes.
Washington was--
>> REGINA: --Mason.
>> BUTLER: --extremely
well-educated,
and a very avid Freemason.
But he was also what a lot
of the rest of them were.
He was a deist.
Now, a deist is someone who
believes in a supreme deity,
but who chooses for
their own reasons
not to specify
what that diety is.
And I believe that George
Washington, together
with a lot of the
other founding fathers,
were not simply deists.
They were members of,
or associated with,
the Venus family.
We have to remember that
George Washington had
a great deal of input into
the design of Washington DC.
Most of what we have said,
and I'm going to say,
about Washington,
DC, couldn't have
happened unless the blueprint
was right in the first place.
It had to be astronomically
correct for it
to do all the things it does.
And believe me, it
does a lot of things.
And George Washington
was in on that.
So he must have had the same
aspirations as the Venus
families.
>> REGINA: When he
was the high degree,
the highest degree Mason--
wasn't he-- of the day.
>> BUTLER: Of the day.
>> REGINA: Of the day.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
There wasn't quite the
height of measurement then.
But, yes.
He was as high as he
could get at the time.
Definitely.
>> REGINA: Right.
OK.
Another esteemed American--
Thomas Jefferson.
>> BUTLER: My hero.
>> REGINA: Me too.
I love them.
I was obsessed reading
one biogra-- in my 20s,
I was obsessed with
him, as though I
was in love with this person.
I couldn't get
enough biographies.
>> BUTLER: An absolute polymath,
a man that was interested
in everything.
>> REGINA: So worth
going to Monticello.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
As far as we are
aware-- well certainly,
we can't prove that
he was a Freemason.
But I have friends
and associates
who think we're getting very
close to proving that when
he was ambassador for America in
France, that he may have become
a Freemason then.
He certainly behaved like one.
He was an even more avid deist
than was George Washington.
He made all sorts of
comments about Christianity.
He detested Christianity.
>> REGINA: They did not
like organized religion,
even though they believed
in a great, creative being.
>> BUTLER: Absolute.
Yes.
>> REGINA: And for
understandable reasons--
what was going on
politically at the time.
>> BUTLER: I think they
would have had a great deal
of sympathy, and probably did
have a great deal of sympathy,
with people like Quakers
who had their beliefs,
but had them quietly-- who
didn't have massive rules
and regulations, didn't have--
>> REGINA: The dogmatism.
>> BUTLER: --didn't have
Popes, didn't have bishops,
anything like that.
I think that's what
Jefferson particularly hated.
And he said on many
occasions, think
about how many people have
died, how many wars there have
been in the names of religion.
And he was right from the start,
just as keen as Washington
and a lot of the
other Founding Fathers
were, that America would not
be dedicated to one religion.
And despite the
fact that one could
be forgiven for believing
that America is committed
to Christianity, in a
constitutional sense,
this is not the case.
So they got what they
wanted, and it's still there.
And anyone in America can lean
in any direction they want,
but they can't lean the
state in that direction.
>> REGINA: Right.
OK.
And also, he was
very deeply involved
with the land and agriculture
and experimentation of crops.
So I bring this in going
back again to the Grange.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
Had he been alive by the time
the Civil War took place,
he would have been
right up there,
as far as the
Grange is concerned,
because he would have seen it.
Also, much more
than Washington--
and you'll know from
your own reading--
Jefferson was not
a person who wanted
an over industrialized America.
He loved the land.
He loved agriculture.
So he might have been
a bit disappointed
when the big centers
of industry developed.
>> REGINA: I have no doubt.
I even have his estate cookbook.
>> BUTLER: Yeah?
>> REGINA: The things that
he and his cooks use to make
in the day.
Yep.
>> BUTLER: Also, it's
worth mentioning--
somebody was asking me
the other day, well,
if you write about all of
this, why did both Washington
and Jefferson have slaves?
And I've looked into
this really carefully.
And I think the expression
"softly, softly,
catchee monkey" comes
in here, because they
lived in the society
that they lived in.
And they would've known that you
cannot change things overnight.
As it was, America ended
up fighting the Civil War
because the South was unwilling
to get rid of its slaves.
And this is quite a few
decades before that.
And Jefferson and Washington
both said many times,
we don't agree with slavery.
But at the moment, we cannot
just stop it in its tracks,
or the country will
disintegrate around our ears.
And I think the
one thing that you
can say about the Venus family
is that they're very patient.
They're very enduring--
that they recognize
that the world is not a utopia.
But they want to move slowly
and steadily in that direction.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And I think he certainly
contributed on many levels
and was a highly-conflicted
man as a result,
because of the
notion of slavery.
>> BUTLER: He didn't
like it intellectually.
He didn't like it morally.
>> REGINA: He did not.
>> BUTLER: But he
lived in a real world.
>> REGINA: Was in Virginia.
So there you go.
OK.
Thomas-- and not Thomas.
Franklin D. Roosevelt.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
>> REGINA: That surprised me.
OK.
Tell us what that connection is.
>> BUTLER: He's another
one of my absolute heroes.
Roosevelt was a
33-degree Freemasonry.
The best way I can describe
the way he thought about things
is to tell you a story about
the upcoming Second World
War and the way that
Roosevelt went about dealing
with that situation.
There is a degree in Scottish
Rite Freemasonry which
deals with a man who is
left in a chapel overnight,
ahead of him receiving
a knighthood.
This is all play
acting, of course.
And this man has to wait
all night in the chapel,
on his own.
And nothing must
interfere with that.
If it does, then he will be
considered to be a coward.
But in this re-enactment, in
this degree in Freemasonry,
there is a battle
going on outside.
This man can hear
this happening.
He hears women
being violated, He
hears his friends being killed.
But he has been
told specifically
that he must stay where
he is and do nothing.
But in the end, he can't do it.
He cannot stay there
and do nothing.
And so he goes out.
All his friends come back
in, in the play acting,
find he's gone, and
think he's run away
claiming to be a coward.
And then some
other men come back
in carrying the body of
this man on a stretcher.
And he's been killed in battle.
And at the end of this
particular ceremony,
it's announced that although
he left the chapel, although he
went against what his
people wanted him to do,
he was the greatest hero of all.
Now, when we look at what took
place with the upcoming Second
World War, we know that
at that point in time,
there was a great deal of
isolationism in the United
States.
Lots of people in the
US, understandably,
wanted to keep to
themselves and not
get involved in yet another
European adventure, which
had cost so many lives
in the First World War.
But Roosevelt had been
through 33 degrees.
And this one with Constance,
who was the man's name,
was one that he must have
paid particular attention to.
In all sorts of
ways, all of this
is played out on the
streets of Washington, DC.
But it was in his heart.
And like Constance,
Roosevelt could not
leave his friends to suffer.
He knew that we here
were in a terrible state.
And because of that, and
because he was a Freemason,
he started to help Britain long
before the Second World War.
Pearl Harbor cemented it.
And America came into the war.
But before that,
Roosevelt was doing
everything he could to help us.
The fact that we
are sitting here
now having this conversation
is thanks to Franklin D.
Roosevelt, because
without him, this country
would have gone under.
And we owe him the
greatest debt of gratitude.
And I am sure that his
aspirations, his motivations,
and his actions were ultimately
Freemasonic and Venus family.
>> REGINA: Well, as a Brit,
thank you for that honoring
of our American part of our
history in your country.
>> BUTLER: You have pulled
us out of it on more than one
occasion.
>> REGINA: OK.
Now we're going to go back.
OK.
Bernard de Clairvaux, Hugh de
Champagne-- and how these men
factor in from the past.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
Round about the beginning of
the 12th century, something
quite astonishing happened
in Western Europe.
It's the best part
of unknown history,
because historians
don't allude to it.
There was a five
or six-pronged plan
to completely revolutionize
the way Europe was run.
It was centered upon a place
in Northern France called
Champagne, and in a city, which
is the capital of Champagne,
called "Trois" or Troyes.
Now, Champagne was part
of France, but it wasn't.
It was one of those
funny states, which
was associated with
the French throne
but not under the French throne.
So they could do
their own thing.
>> REGINA: Kind of
principality-- >> BUTLER:
That's right, kind of like
a principality-- a county,
in that case.
I don't know.
Anyway, it was different.
And it was ruled by a
succession of counts.
And they had great power
within their own lands.
And they didn't always get on
very well with the French King.
Now, we know that the
people in Champagne
were party to very
old religions.
Equated with the Virgin Mary
was their own character,
who they called Rose Mirth.
And Rose Mirth was just
another name for Isis,
for Demeter, for all of
the names of the goddess.
And when they worshipped the
Virgin Mary, which they weren't
allowed to do in
church, chances are
that they were thinking
of their own deity.
The amount that the Virgin
Mary has gone through,
in terms of being
changed, by people
who definitely saw her as a
goddess is quite incredible.
And they got away with it
because she was Jesus' mother.
But really, there was a lot
more going on below the surface.
And just as a side
issue, my wife and I
went to Malta, the island of
Malta in the Mediterranean.
There are 365 churches on Malta.
Almost all of them are
dedicated to the Virgin Mary.
And you hardly see a statue of
Christ anywhere on the island.
That island worships
the goddess.
They just give her
a different name.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And Hugh de Champagne was
also part of the real origins
of the Knights Templar.
>> BUTLER: He was.
>> REGINA: And they were
dedicated to Mary Magdalene.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
Yes.
And to Mary the Virgin.
>> REGINA: And to
Mary the Virgin.
>> BUTLER: It makes you wonder
what the name Mary actually
was, or meant, because--
>> REGINA: Well,
it's the most ubiquitous
name that exists today
on the planet, I think.
>> BUTLER: But it comes up so
many times in terms of feminine
deity.
>> REGINA: Yes, it does.
>> BUTLER: Anyway,
Hugh of Champagne,
together with people
that he knew--
other leading aristocrats
in Champagne--
decided that the only way
they were ever going to change
anything was if they
changed the church.
So they worked and
worked and worked at it
until they managed to get one
of their own number elected
as Pope.
And the first thing
that he did was
to ask for a crusade, in which
he wanted Jerusalem to be
recaptured by Christianity.
Now, we know now that there
was ulterior motives involved--
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
It was very political.
And that's where they
gathered together,
a band of kind of fools
and the desperate.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
Absolutely.
But in amongst all
that, they also
created two other organizations
that were important.
One was the Knights Templar,
that we talked about and will
talk about.
And the other one
was an order of monks
called the Cistercians.
The Cistercians were amazing.
They came on the scene so
fresh and new and different,
and did things in an
entirely different way.
They were entirely
self-sufficient for one thing.
They were tremendous farmers.
They were also very good
engineers-- >> REGINA:
Mathematicians-- all of it.
>> BUTLER: Mathematicians,
everything.
Builders-- everything they did.
But they became so powerful,
and particularly one of them
called St. Bernard
of Clairvaux, became
so powerful that he could
even tell Pope's what to do.
>> REGINA: He had great
respect among people.
>> BUTLER: Oh, absolutely.
They loved him.
Jewish people
especially loved him,
because he stopped pogroms
all over the place.
And the thing is that
with Bernard inventing,
or virtually inventing,
the Knights Templar,
and him being so powerful inside
Christianity, at the same time,
Hugh had started a whole
series of international markets
in Champagne, which were
called the Champagne Fairs.
These were designed
to bring people
in from known and unknown
places, all through the year,
to buy and sell, to
get money working.
This was really,
really important
because medievalism
was also feudalism.
Everything was owned
by just a few people.
And ordinary people couldn't
get their hands on any money.
But this multi-pronged
plan went on in champagne
was deliberately designed
to break that down,
to free it all up, to subvert
the power of the church,
and to make sure
that money started
to flow throughout society.
And that wouldn't
have been possible
without the Ciscercians.
And it certainly wouldn't
have been possible
without the Knights Templar.
And Hugh de Payens--
sorry, the count--
although he wanted to become
one of the original Knights
Templars, waited a year or two,
and then went and joined them
in Jerusalem.
And the title passed
to his nephew,
once he knew things
were up and running
the way he wanted them to.
But the other ulterior
motive of his cause
was to get into Jerusalem
and get things out
of Jerusalem, which could
be taken to where the New
Jerusalem was going to be.
>> REGINA: Yes.
The Americas.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
Ultimately.
>> REGINA: Ultimately-- because
that was quite a bit later.
We're going to hopscotch here.
We're having so
much fun chatting.
We're going to hopscotch
through here a bit,
because we need to get
to the city of Osiris
and the city of
Isis in particular--
Washington DC.
I'm trying to look at
Leonardo da Vinci as well.
One thing that people will
note is, wait a minute,
this is called "America,
a Nation of Goddesses."
So far, all we're hearing
about is these men
who were the Venus families.
But you're saying
the feminine part
comes in because
they were devoted
to these feminine principles.
>> BUTLER: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: OK.
So I'm just trying to
get clear on that for any
of the women saying, I'm
looking for my story in here.
So we have these prominent
men, these Venus families,
devoted to these
feminine principles.
Now, we have arrived on
what will be American soil.
And we have the laying
out of Washington, DC.
So let's go for it there.
Then we're going
to go to the city
of-- as you call it, the city of
Osiris, which is New York City.
>> BUTLER: New York, yes.
Washington, DC, is
unique in that it's
one of very few cities in
the world which were planned
from scratch, and where,
therefore, the designers had
carte blanche to do
whatever they wanted to do.
What they started
out by doing was
to build something
which looks very
much like an ancient Olmec
or Mayan city, in that it
is deliberately,
astronomically-aligned
to the cardinal points.
And where the
buildings upon it were
placed in certain positions,
to do certain things
at certain times of year, to
go into an absolute detailed
explanation of all the
things that happened
would take us the
rest of the day.
But there's one thing which
really puts the lid on it,
and that is the
Washington Monument.
The Washington Monument is much
more than it appears to be.
It is where it.
Is the height it is because
it serves certain functions
throughout the year.
One of those functions is that
on the day of the Constitution,
or Constitution Day, as
the sun is going down,
it casts the shadow from
the Washington Monument that
goes right along the central
mall and just brushes
the Western doors
of the Capitol.
What's really
important about it is,
it could be said that those
who designed this to happen
were merely commemorating the
signing of the Constitution.
But that's also the day
of the Elysian ceremonies.
Now, this phenomena
takes place another time
during the year,
which is in March.
Now, there is no particular
anniversary for America itself
on that particular day.
But it's the date of the
rebirth of the god Attis.
And his story is just
a different version
of the retelling of the dying
and reborn god of the grain
and of the goddess.
So they have managed, clever
people that they were,
to build this monument
that does these two
very specific things on only
two days out of the year.
It doesn't do it
on any other day.
And they can say,
this means freedom.
When the edge of the shadow
touches the Western doors,
it confirms that
America is free,
that it doesn't have to kowtow
to the old medieval systems
and to all that went on
back in the old world.
>> REGINA: No.
We kowtow to Madison Avenue.
>> BUTLER: But the Washington
Monument itself does lots
of other things as well.
For example, just south
of the White House,
there is a huge
oval of land, which
is called the Ellipse--
very famous, big park.
It's elliptical.
And various ceremonies
take place there--
but it's open to the public.
And it used to be a series of
baseball-- >> REGINA: Diamonds.
>> BUTLER: --diamonds.
Yes.
I'm sorry.
I'm English.
But now, it's just an open park.
But it's much more than that.
It has megalithic dimensions.
You remember the
megalithic yard?
>> REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
>> BUTLER: It's measurable.
Right across-- 366
megalithic yards exactly.
So we looked to see what
happens with the shadow
from the Washington Monument.
It's absolutely uncanny.
On the 21st of December, which
we know is a pagan celebration,
the tip of the shadow just
grazes the side of the Ellipse.
And Janet was the first one
who said, this is meant to be.
This is what happens at
the midwinter solstice.
It is the meeting of
the god and the goddess.
It's the fertilization of the
Earth goddess by the sky god.
And they've symbolized
it through this shadow.
And I could go on and tell
you so many other things.
One thing I must mention--
tiny, little building
in the grounds of the Capitol
called the Summer House.
Hardly anybody even
knows it's there,
except the people who
work around there.
In the summer, they
may go there and sit
and have the sandwiches.
And there's a water
fountain in there,
so you can have a-- but this
particular building is probably
more fascinating than anything
else in Washington, DC,
because it's a veritable
observatory of Venus
and the Moon.
It has alignments all
over Washington, DC.
It was originally going
to be one of the pair.
There was going
to be two of them.
But the other one
never got built
because some of the senators
said, you've got one surmount.
You can't have another one.
And you can even work out
the longitude and latitude
of the moon by standing in
the entrance to this place.
It's just phenomenal.
And we keep finding
more and more things
all over Washington, DC.
>> REGINA: Thank you so much
for making our capital mystical
and beautiful, and giving it
more dimension than most people
understand.
>> BUTLER: To me, it's the
most sacred city in the world,
without a shadow of a doubt.
>> REGINA: I love it.
>> BUTLER: It beats Rome and
Jerusalem into a [INAUDIBLE]
because it was deliberately
built that way.
And the fact that hardly
anybody knows it is great.
I shouldn't be here
talking to you now,
because it belongs to me.
It's mine.
>> REGINA: Oh.
Thank you for sharing.
I'm going to ask you one more
question, while we're on it.
We'll go up a little
north to the city of New
York, the city of Osiris.
And tell us your
thoughts on that
and what you've observed
before we wrap it up.
>> BUTLER: OK.
One of the things about New
York is central station,
which everybody knows about--
fantastic-looking building.
And on the roof of New
York's Central-- >> REGINA:
Grand Central.
>> BUTLER: --Grand
Central-- is a star map.
Now, the star map shows all
the major constellations
of the Milky Way and of
the plane of the ecliptic.
But the problem is that
they're all back to front.
Nobody really understood
why they were back to front.
But all sorts of ideas
have been put forward
about how the architect made
projections from the floor.
And so everything ended up as
if the sky appeared on the West,
whereas in fact, it appears on
the East and turns that way.
But there is an exception.
And that exception is a
constellation called Orion.
Orion is the only constellation
on the ceiling of the station
that is the correct way round.
That could not have happened--
>> REGINA: By accident.
>> BUTLER: --by accident.
It's understandable that
they've got the whole thing back
to front, but not--
[INTERPOSING VOICES] >> REGINA:
--one aspect correct, yes.
>> BUTLER: So Janet
and I thought,
they're trying to
tell us something.
And we already
knew that Orion was
very important to our ancient
ancestors-- and, in particular,
part of Orion, which is called
Orion's Belt. Now, Orion's Belt
is three stars in a row, but
there's just a very slight dog
leg.
So you always know
when you're looking
at something that represents
Orion's Belt, because it
looks straight.
But if you look very
carefully, there's
a very slight dog
leg in the middle.
And we were looking at
other examples of obelisks
like the one in Washington, DC.
And Janet, god bless her,
found three particular obelisk.
The northernmost one
is in Central Park
and is truly Egyptian,
because it was brought across.
And it matches.
It's one of the pair.
And the other one is, like,
two minutes walk from here.
>> REGINA: Yes, it is--
right across the river.
Yes.
>> BUTLER: And I think you
call yours Cleopatra's Needle
as well, as we call ours.
But anyway, it's there.
And there are two much
more modern obelisks
as we come down Manhattan.
And I love to do graphics
and things like that there,
and very accurate measurements.
And so I put all these on
a map, and I measured them
as accurately as I could.
I took the positions of the
real Orion's Belt in the sky,
scaled it up, and placed it on.
And it's absolutely perfect.
They have recreated Orion's Belt
down the length of New York.
And the bottom of the three
is by St. Paul's Church-- >>
REGINA: Mhm.
Cathedral.
>> BUTLER: --which is right
by ground zero, and somehow,
miraculously, survived.
And that really was a miracle.
So we know that the kind of
business which had gone on
in Washington, DC,
in terms of making
these places holy and
special, has been perpetuated
in other cities too.
And it's such a
big job that we are
opening new doors all the time.
There's obviously much more in
New York that we haven't seen.
The problem is that Washington
has so much that we keep
getting dragged back to it.
>> REGINA: Oh, I wish you'd
just focus on San Francisco.
But I'm afraid we may not find
that there is a lot of people
who made some money in the
gold mining days, who ended up
on the Barbary Coast.
And other things
happened instead.
But we are out of time.
But I have to tell you, it's
been such a fascinating journey
with you.
And even though you won't see
the names of a lot of women
in your book, the
whole intention
is that these men were dedicated
to the feminine principles
and the Venusian principles.
>> BUTLER: Yes.
And the whole book is
dedicated to women.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Yes.
Well, I want to thank you
so much, you and Janet both,
for the incredible
research you did on this,
and putting it all
together for us.
And do let us know, the more
you discover on Washington Dc,
and maybe even San Francisco.
>> BUTLER: Well, I will.
And as we say in the
North of England,
thank you for having me.
>> REGINA: Yes, indeed.
Again, the name of the
book is "America, Nation
of Goddesses," which can be
found at major booksellers.
Until next time, thank you
again for joining us here
in London for "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]